COMP30220 Distributed Systems Practical 

Lab 2: RMI-based Distribution Work individually. Submit your code on 
csmoodle.ucd.ie by the deadline given on moodle. Please submit a single ZIP file 
(name is <student-num>.zip) containing your source code and any text files 
required for the solution. Please read the QuoCo scenario before attempting this 
practical. The broad objective of this practical is to adapt the code provided 
to use RMI for interaction between each of the 4 services and between the broker 
and the client. I have chosen to do this is a piece-meal way. First working on 
the client / broker interface, and then on the broker / quotation service 
interface. Finally, I consider how to all the services to be started 
independently. 

Task 1: Splitting the Client & Broker Grade: D

The first task is to use RMI for interaction between the client and the broker components. 
We will continue to use the existing Registry for broker-quotation service interaction.

a) The first thing we need to do is to change the Broker service code to be used with RMI. 
In particular, you should look over the RMI Calculator code from the lecture notes. 

Here you should see that the calculator interface extends the java.rmi.Remote 
interface and all methods defined in the interface should throw 
java.rmi.RemoteException. You should modify the Broker interface to reflect 
this. 

NOTE: Doing this will cause your client code to break (the exception is not 
handled when the getQuotations(...) method is invoked). You can fix this by 
placing the loop in a try...catch statement. 

b) The next thing we need to do is to launch the RMI registry as we cannot use 
RMI if the registry has not been launched. This involves inserting the following 
line of code at the start of the main method in the client code: Registry 
registry = LocateRegistry.createRegistry(1099); NOTE: This line will need to be 
modified because the createRegistry(...) method throws an exception. 

c) The third step involves registering the broker service with the RMI Registry. 
Because this requires the existence of the RMI registry, it can no longer be 
done in the static initialization block. Instead, you should create and register 
the Broker Service in the line immediately after the line(s) that create the 
registry (you did this in step b). This involves 2 lines of code and you should 
examine the RMI Calculator (Server) example to understand how to do this. You 
can reuse the constant BROKER_SERVICE for the object identifier in the RMI 
implementation. 

d) The last step for the first problem is to locate the broker service and use 
it. In this original version of the client, this step was carried out by the 
ServiceRegistry.lookup(...) step. You need to modify this line to use the 
equivalent for RMI (see the RMI Calculator Client code for an example). Make 
sure that you do not use the version of the object that you created when 
registering the service (step c). Also, remove the line of code that registers 
the Broker service with the ServiceRegistry (it was in the static initialisation 
block of the Main class). 

Task 2: Distributing the Service Grade: C This next task is simply to reorganise 
the code and distribute it. To do this, you will replace your Main class with 2 
classes entitled: Server and Client. Start by renaming the Main class to Client 
and then make a copy of this class called Server. Next, we need to put all the 
code relating to the server side (the broker & quotation service related code) 
into the Server class and the code relating to the Client (the lookup for the 
client and the client info dummy data). Look at the RMI Calculator for an 
example, and reorganise the code as you think best. You should need to run both 
the Server and the Client programs for your system to work. 

It only has to work in the order: launch Server then Client. You may also find that the Server code 
quits before the client can connect. This is because the server code only 
registers the object. It does not do anything else. Perhaps put the following 
code at the end to stop it quitting: 

while (true) {
try {
Thread.sleep(10000);
} catch (InterruptedException e) {
e.printStackTrace(); }
}

You should delete the Main class to avoid confusion.

Task 3: Splitting the Broker & Quotation Services Grade: B The third problem 
invokes doing the same thing as Task 1, but for the 3 quotation services. Each 
service should be recast as an RMI-based service. You should delete the 
ServiceRegistry class and the static initialisation block in the server class. 
You also need to modify the code in the Broker Service because it uses the 
ServiceRegistry. 

Task 4: Full Distribution Grade: A The final task / challenge 
is to attempt full distribution. For this: 

1. Each service should be deployable in isolation (i.e. you should be able to 
start any of the 4 services in any order). This means you need a main method for 
each service (you can put them in the service implementation classes). 

2. The Client should only require the Broker Service to be started to work.

3. You should introduce an Infrastructure class whose main method creates the registry (this should be the first
service to be started).

4. It should be possible to deploy the service over multiple machines WITHOUT recompilation of code (consider
the arguments that can be passed to the main method).

5. Write a SHORT text file that explains how to deploy your solution (call it DEPLOY.txt and put it in the root
folder of the project).


Additional Marks
+ grades (e.g. A+) can be attained through consideration of boundary cases, good exception handling, nice features that enhance the quality of your solution.
- grades (e.g. A-) can be attained though lack of commenting and indentation, bad naming conventions or sloppy code.
